---
title: "Covid-19 Boredom: Hackysacks + Open Ended Algorithms vs Supervised Learning"
published: true
---

I used to be suspicious of claims that supervised learning is the wrong way towards general artificial intelligence, like this [DeepMind post](https://deepmind.com/blog/article/unsupervised-learning) claiming that humans actually learn by unsupervised learning more than supervised. In their words, the distinction is one of learning with (supervised) or without (unsupervised) a specific task in mind. The authors cite toddlers and Ludwig Wittgenstein's "language games" to bolster their arguments, but on both accounts I would disagree.

In the case of Wittgenstein, he develops his theory of "language games" in the book *Philosophical Investigations*, where his examples are task-oriented, i.e. more like supervised learning than unsupervised. The prototypical example is of two builders lacking a common language, where one tries to get the other to pass him a brick (Section 2, p. 15 of the *Bibliothek Suhrkamp* edition). As for toddlers, sure there is a lot of exploration, but with my daughter at least, I felt like her exploration of the world and development were guided by task-oriented feedback involving hunger, discomfort, warmth, etc..

But a coincidence of Covid-19 induced boredom (I am learning to hackysack) and social-distancing (I caught up with a friend over the phone and without beer, so we actually sent each other relevant links post-chat) has changed my mind. [Christopher Prohm](https://cprohm.de/) directed me to [this tutorial from ICML 2019](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g6HiuEnbwJE) on open-ended algorithms by Jeff Clune, Joel Lehman and Ken Stanley. The basic idea in terms of machine learning and optimization is that sometimes you can find global optima better (or better local optima) if your goal is novelty rather than finding the optimum. In terms of the near-sighted hiker methaphor I used for my first research talk in 1997 on work with [Harald Scheraga's protein folding group at Cornell University](http://scheraga.chem.cornell.edu), a near-sighted hiker seeking the lowest elevation of a landscape can have better success by optimizing seeing new scenery than actually looking for a lowpoint.

Now for ingredient two in my change of heart on supervised learning. When I was in middle school, the cool kids were good at hackysack. Back then I was still fighting my inner geek, so I learned to be OK, but never good, with a hackysack. But with the Covid-19 restrictions, a hacksack is just about a perfect fit for our small lawn. As I have been "hacking" (that's what we called it in suburban Philly in the 80's), I have been thinking what the feedback loop is that leads to improvement. I have a hard time believing that each time my shoe hits the hackysack in a good way that I have some dopamine explosion that reinforces this foot-eye coordination. It feels more like fun-oriented learning, rather than some physical analogue of supervised learning.
